Git-Flows
 Weight: 1
 Project will start Dec 1, 2025 12:00 AM, must end by Dec 8, 2025 12:00 AM
 Manual QA review must be done (request it when you are done with the project)
Overview
Git-Flow is a branching model for Git, proposed by Vincent Driessen, that helps developers manage features, releases, and hotfixes in a consistent and scalable way. It introduces well-defined roles for branches and helps teams coordinate code changes more effectively. Git-Flow is particularly beneficial for large-scale projects where multiple developers work simultaneously on various aspects of the codebase.

Git-Flow revolves around five primary branch types:

main (or master) – production-ready code
develop – ongoing development
feature/* – new features in progress
release/* – preparation for production releases
hotfix/* – critical bug fixes on the main branch
Relevance in the Development Process
Git-Flow improves:

Code organization by clearly separating development stages
Team collaboration through structured branching and merging workflows
Code stability by allowing features to be tested and integrated before reaching production
Release management by isolating release-specific tasks
Git-Flow is widely adopted in agile and CI/CD environments, ensuring seamless integration and deployment pipelines while reducing conflicts and regression bugs.

Learning Objectives
By the end of this, learners should be able to:

Understand the purpose and structure of Git-Flow.
Identify the different branch types and their roles.
Apply Git-Flow in real-world collaborative development projects.
Manage feature development, hotfixes, and release cycles using Git best practices.
Learning Outcomes
Learners will be able to:

Explain how Git-Flow helps manage large codebases and team contributions.
Create and manage branches following the Git-Flow model.
Use Git commands to initiate features, releases, and hotfix branches.
Integrate Git-Flow into CI/CD pipelines for automated testing and deployments.
Git-Flow Best Practices
Best Practice	Description
Start with develop	Always branch off from develop for new features, not main.
Feature Isolation	Keep each feature in its own branch to reduce merge conflicts.
Merge via Pull Requests	Use pull/merge requests for all merges to ensure code review.
Keep main clean	Only production-ready code goes into main. Never push untested code here.
Tag Releases	Use Git tags on the main branch to mark official release points.
Use hotfix/* for urgent bugs	Apply emergency fixes directly to main via a hotfix/ branch and merge them back into develop.
Document your workflow	Maintain clear documentation of your Git-Flow in your project’s README or internal wiki.
Common Git-Flow Commands
git flow init                   # Initialize Git-Flow
git flow feature start <name>  # Start a new feature branch
git flow feature finish <name> # Finish feature and merge into develop
git flow release start <x.x.x> # Start a release branch
git flow release finish <x.x.x> # Merge release into main and develop
git flow hotfix start <x.x.x>  # Start a hotfix branch
git flow hotfix finish <x.x.x> # Finish hotfix and merge into main & develop
📝 Project Assessment (Hybrid)
Your project will be evaluated primarily through manual reviews. To ensure you receive your full score, please:

✅ Complete your project on time
📄 Submit all required files
🔗 Generate your review link
👥 Have your peers review your work

An auto-check will also be in place to verify the presence of core files needed for manual review.

⏰ Important Note
If the deadline passes, you won’t be able to generate your review link—so be sure to submit on time!

We’re here to support your learning journey. Happy coding! ✨

Quiz questions
Great! You've completed the quiz successfully! Keep going! (Show quiz)
Tasks
0. Setting up gitflow
mandatory
Objective: Understand and initialize a GitFlow workflow

Instructions:

Install git-flow if not already installed. Steps here

Create an empty repository ALXprodev-advanced_git

Clone your repository to have it available locally.

Create a branch develop

Push the develop branch to the remote repository

Initialize Git Flow within the repository using default settings i.e git-flow init [-d]

Create an empty README.md file

Commit your file to staging and Push

Repo:

GitHub repository: ALXprodev-advanced_git
File: README.md
1. Creating a feature branch
mandatory
Objective: Learn how to work with feature branches in GitFlow.

Instructions:

Create a new feature branch feature/implement-login from the develop branch

In the feature/implement-login create a new directory called login-page, inside it create a README.md file with the message: Login Feature Coming soon

Commit your changes and push to github

Use commit message feat: scaffolding login page

Repo:

GitHub repository: ALXprodev-advanced_git
File: login-page/README.md
2. Creating a Release Branch
mandatory
Objective: Understand the release process in GitFlow.

Instructions:

Create a new feature branch feature/implement-signup from the develop branch and create a directory called signup-page with a README.md file with the message feature coming soon

Commit the changes and push to github

Merge the 2 branches to the develop branch. Fix conflicts if any

Create a new release branch release/1.0.0

Make changes to signup/README.md file by adding the following text:” data requirements: email, firstName, lastName, profilePic]” inside the release branch

Commit and push changes to github then merge the release branch to the main branch and the develop branch

Tag the release with v1.0.0 and push the tags to the remote repository

Repo:

GitHub repository: ALXprodev-advanced_git
File: login-page/README.md, signup-page/README.md
3. Git Hooks and Automation
mandatory
Objective: Implement Git hooks to automate parts of the GitFlow process.

Instructions:

Implement a pre-commit hook in the file .git/hooks/pre-commit that checks if each directory in a Git repository has a README file

Implement a post-merge hook that logs the merge after completing a merge into the main branch.

Hint: Read more here

Repo:

GitHub repository: ALXprodev-advanced_git
4. Manual Review
mandatory
Repo:

GitHub repository: ALXprodev-advanced_git
